The Small States Network for Economic Development (SSNED) provides a mechanism for institutional building in small states. The establishment of the Small States Network for Economic Development was first proposed by Malta at the 2005 Small States Forum held in Washington, and the mandate to establish it was given by the 2006 Small States Forum held in Singapore. All small states members of the Small States Forum are eligible for membership, free of charge.According to the Network’s statute its mission is to facilitate the exchange of “best practices” among small states, to promote the increased integration of the concerns and interests of small states into the policies and programmes of the international community, and to undertake or support such related actions as will further these goals and the sustainable development of SSNED Members.The Network is governed by a Board of Trustees in line with its statute. Mr Grantley Smith, who represents Barbados, currently chairs the Board, while the secretary of the Board is Mr Kyle Peters, who also provides liaison with the World Bank.Small Island Developing States (SIDS) are maritime countries that tend to share similar sustainable development challenges, including small but growing populations, limited resources, remoteness, susceptibility to natural disasters, vulnerability to external shocks, excessive dependence on international trade, and fragile environments. Their growth and development is also held back by high communication, energy and transportation costs, irregular international transport volumes, disproportionately expensive public administration and infrastructure due to their small size, and little to no opportunity to create economies of scale.
The SIDS were first recognized as a distinct group of developing countries at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in June 1992. The Barbados Programme of Action was produced in 1994 to assist the SIDS in their sustainable development efforts. The United Nations Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States (UN-OHRLLS) represents this group of states.


== Embracing sustainability ==
Many SIDS now recognise the need to move towards low-carbon, climate resilient economies, as set out in the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) implementation plan for climate change-resilient development. SIDS often rely heavily on imported fossil fuels, spending an ever-larger proportion of their GDP on energy imports. Renewable technologies have the advantage of providing energy at a lower cost than fossil fuels and making SIDS more sustainable. Barbados has been successful in adopting the use of solar water heaters (SWHs). A 2012 report published by the Climate & Development Knowledge Network showed that its SWH industry now boasts over 50,000 installations. These have saved consumers as much as US$137 million since the early 1970s. The report suggested that Barbados's experience could be easily replicated in other SIDS with high fossil fuel imports and abundant sunshine.


== List of SIDS ==
Currently, the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs lists 57 small island developing states. These are broken down into three geographic regions: the Caribbean; the Pacific; and Africa, Indian Ocean, Mediterranean and South China Sea (AIMS)., including Associate Members of the Regional Commissions. Each of these regions has a regional cooperation body: the Caribbean Community, the Pacific Islands Forum and the Indian Ocean Commission respectively, which many SIDS are members or associate members of. In addition, most (but not all) SIDS are members of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS), which performs lobbying and negotiating functions for the SIDS within the United Nations system. The UNCTAD website states that "the UN never established criteria to determine an official list of SIDS" but it maintains a shorter, unofficial list on its website for analytical purposes.


== Notes ==


== See also ==
Group of 77
African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (ACP)
Islands First (environmental organization)
2010 United Nations Climate Change Conference
Sea level rise#Island nations


== References ==


== External links ==
List of SIDS - Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform of United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN-DESA)
About SIDS, United Nations Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States
List of SIDS United Nations, Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States
AOSIS Members, Alliance of Small Island States
Chris Becker, International Monetary Fund, 'Small Island States in the Pacific: the Tyranny of Distance?'